'\" t
.\"
.\" Copyright © 2019 Andreas Misje
.\"
.\" This file is part of dhcpoptinj.
.\"
.\" dhcpoptinj is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
.\" the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
.\" Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" dhcpoptinj is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
.\" ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for
.\" more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with dhcpoptinj. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.
.Dd February 10, 2019
.Dt DHCPOPTINJ 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dhcpoptinj
.Nd DHCP option injector, a tool to manipulate DHCP packet options
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Bk
.Op Fl df
.Ek
.Bk
.Op Fl Fl forward-on-fail
.Ek
.Bk
.Op Fl i Ns | Ns Fl r
.Ek
.Bk
.Op Fl p Op Ar pid_file
.Ek
.Bk
.Fl q Ar queue_num
.Ek
.Bk
.Fl o Ar dhcp_option
.Ek
.Bk
.Op Po Fl o Ar dhcp_option Pc ...
.Ek
.Bk
.Nm
.Fl h Ns | Ns Fl v
.Ek
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a fairly simple tool for manipulating DHCP options in a BOOTP/DHCP packet.
It relies on netfilter queue and nftables/iptables rules, in which you specify what packets to send to
.Nm .
.Nm
waits for packets to arrive in a netfilter queue.
It will ensure that a packet is in fact a BOOTP/DHCP packet, and if so proceed to inject or replace options.
It will recalculate the IPv4 header checksum, disable the UDP checksum (for a simpler implementation) and then give the packet back to netfilter.
.Pp
Based on the options
.Fl Fl ignore-existing-opt
and
.Fl Fl remove-existing-opt
.Nm
may be configured to replace matching options or leave them in place.
.Fl Fl forward-on-fail
can be used to accept the packet (leaving it unaltered) if the package mangling should fail for any reason.
.Ss Invocation
.Nm
incorrectly requires flags to run.
The netfilter queue number
.Pq Fl Fl queue
is necessary, and also at least one DHCP option
.Pq Fl Fl option .
See
.Sx EXAMPLES .
.Ss Argument list processing
.Nm
is invoked only with options and no arguments:
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl r, .Fl .Fl remove-existing-opt" -offset indent
.It Fl d , Fl Fl debug
Make
.Nm
tell you as much as possible about what it does and tries to do.
.It Fl f , Fl Fl foreground
Prevent
.Nm
from running in the background.
.It "\ \ \ " Fl Fl forward-on-fail
If the process of injecting options should fail, let the unaltered DHCP packet pass through.
The default behaviour is to drop the packet if options could not be injected.
.It Fl h , Fl Fl help
Print a help text.
.It Fl i , Fl Fl ignore-existing-opt
Proceed if an injected option already exists in the original packet.
Unless
.Fl Fl remove-existing-opt
is provided, the default behaviour is to drop the packet.
.It Fl o , Fl Fl option Ar dhcp_option
DHCP option to inject as a hex string, where the first byte indicates the option code.
The option length field is automatically calculated and must be omitted.
Several options may be injected.
.Pp
The hex string may be delimited by non-hexadecimal characters for readability.
The following hex strings all produce the same result: '01 02 03', '01:02:03', '010203', '01 <-> 02 <-> 03'.
Remember to quote these arguments if they contains spaces or other characters that have special meaning to your shell.
.It Fl p , Fl Fl pid-file Op Pa pid_file
Write PID to file, using specified path or a default sensible location.
.It Fl q , Fl Fl queue Ar queue_num
The netfilter queue number to use
.It Fl r , Fl Fl remove-existing-opt
Remove existing DHCP options of the same kind as those to be injected.
.It Fl v , Fl Fl version
Display version.
.El
.Pp
.Ss DHCP options
All the DHCP options specified with the
.Fl o Ns / Ns Fl Fl option
flag will be added before the terminating option (end option, 255).
The packet is padded if necessary and sent back to netfilter.
The IPv4 header checksum is recalculated, but the UDP checksum is set to 0 (disabled).
None of the added options are checked for whether they are valid, or whether the option codes are valid.
Options are currently not (automatically) padded individually, but they can be manually padded by adding options with code 0 (one pad byte per option).
This special option is the only option that does not have any payload (the end option, 255, is inserted automatically and cannot be manually added).
Padding individual options should not be necessary.
.Pp
The option hex string is written as a series of two-digit pairs,
optionally delimited by one or more non-hexadecimal characters: '466A6173','46 6A 61 73', '46:6A:61:73' etc.
There is a maximum limit of 256 bytes per option, excluding the option code (the first byte) and the automatically inserted length byte.
At least one option must be provided.
.Pp
If the packet already contains a DHCP option that is to be injected (matched by code), the behaviour depends on the command line options
.Fl Fl ignore-existing-opt
and
.Fl Fl remove-existing-opt :
.Bl -tag -width ".Pq none" -offset indent
.It Pq none
The packet will be dropped.
.It Fl i
The existing options are ignored and the injected options are added.
.It Fl r
Any existing options are removed and the injected options are added.
.El
.Pp
.Em Note
that injected options will not be injected in the same place as those that may have been removed if using
.Fl r .
However, this should not matter.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std dhcpoptinj
.Sh EXAMPLES
Let us say you have two interfaces bridged together, eth0 and eth1.
Let us say you want to intercept all BOOTP requests coming from eth0 and inject the relay agent information option (82/0x52).
Let us make up a silly payload: An agent circuit ID sub-option with the value "Fjas".
.Pp
Add a rule to the iptables mangle table:
.Pp
.Dl sudo iptables -t mangle -A PREROUTING -m physdev --physdev-in eth0 -p udp --dport 67 -j NFQUEUE --queue-num 42
.Pp
Then run
.Nm
(let us run it in the foreground with extra debug output):
.Pp
.Dl sudo dhcpoptinj -d -f -q 42 -o'52 01 04 46 6A 61 73'
.Pp
.Em Note
that
.Nm
must be run by a user with the CAP_NET_ADMIN capability.
You do not need to, and you really should not run
.Nm
as root.
Instead, you can for instance grant the CAP_NET_ADMIN capability to the binary (using
.Em setcap )
and limit execution rights to only a specific user or group.
This is a method used for running Wireshark as non-root, so you will find several guides helping you accomplish this.
.Pp
Now send a DHCP packet to the eth0 interface and watch it (using a tool like Wireshark
.Pq Lk https://\:www.wireshark.org/
having been modified when it reaches the bridged interface.
It should have the injected option at the end of the option list.
If you capture the incoming DHCP packet with Wireshark, it will appear unmodified although it will in fact be mangled.
.Pp
Note the format of the argument to the
.Fl o
option: It should be a hexadecimal string starting with the DHCP option code followed by the option payload.
The option length (the byte that normally follows the option code) is automatically calculated and must not be specified.
The hex string can be delimited by non-hexadecimal characters for readability.
All options must have a payload, except for the special pad option
.Pq Lk https://\:tools.ietf.org/\:html/\:rfc2132#section-2
(code 0).
.Pp
The layout of the nonsensical option used in this example, 52 01 04 46 6A 61 73, (first the DHCP option layout
.Pq Lk https://\:tools.ietf.org/\:html/\:rfc2132#section-2 ,
then the specific relay agent information option sub-option layout
.Pq Lk https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3046#section-2.0 )
is as follows:
.Pp
.TS
allbox tab(;);
c c c
c c c.
Code;Length;Data
52;(auto);01 04 46 6A 61 73 ("Fjas")
.TE
.Pp
.TS
allbox tab(;);
c c c
c c c.
Sub-opt.;Lenth;Data
01;4;46 6A 61 73 ("Fjas")
.TE
.Sh SEE ALSO
iptables(8), nftables(8), dhcp-options(5)
.Sh AUTHORS
.An "Andreas Misje" Aq amisje@gmail.com
